---
layout: workshop
title: "Tutorial for Phylogenomics Workshop using IQ-TREE (Cesky Krumlov, 2019)"
author: _Stephen Crotty_
date: _24 January 2019_
docid: 100
tags:
- workshop
---

Tutorial for Phylogenomics Workshop using IQ-TREE (Cesky Krumlov, Czech republic, 2019)
===================

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**  *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

- [1) Input data](#1-input-data)
- [2) Inferring the first phylogeny](#2-inferring-the-first-phylogeny)
- [3) Applying partition model](#3-applying-partition-model)
- [4) Choosing the best partitioning scheme](#4-choosing-the-best-partitioning-scheme)
- [5) Applying a mixture model - GHOST](#7-applying-a-mixture-model-GHOST)
- [6) Tree topology tests](#5-tree-topology-tests)
- [7) Concordance factors](#6-concordance-factors)
- [8) Applying a mixture model - GHOST](#7-applying-a-mixture-model-GHOST)
- [9) Identifying most influential genes (optional)](#9-identifying-most-influential-genes-optional)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

<!--more-->


If you haven't installed IQ-TREE, please [download](http://www.iqtree.org/#download) and [install](../Quickstart) the binary
for your platform. For the next steps, the folder containing your `iqtree` executable should be added to your PATH enviroment variable so that IQ-TREE can be invoked by simply entering `iqtree` at the command-line. Alternatively, you can also copy `iqtree` binary into your system search.

Run the command

	iqtree

should display something like this to the screen:

	IQ-TREE multicore version 1.7-beta6 for Mac OS X 64-bit built Nov  6 2018
	Developed by Bui Quang Minh, Nguyen Lam Tung, Olga Chernomor,
	Heiko Schmidt, Dominik Schrempf, Michael Woodhams.
	
	Command-line examples (replace 'iqtree ...' by actual path to executable):


1) Input data
----------
<div class="hline"></div>

We will use a Turtle data set to demonstrate the use of IQ-TREE throughout the workshop. Please download the following input files:

* [turtle.fa](data/turtle.fa): The DNA alignment (in FASTA format), which is a subset of the original Turtle data set used to assess the phylogenetic position of Turtle relative to Crocodile and Bird ([Chiari et al., 2012]).
* [turtle.nex](data/turtle.nex): The partition file (in NEXUS format) defining 29 genes, which are a subset of 248 genes from [Chiari et al., 2012].

> **QUESTIONS:**
>
> * View the alignment in Jalview.
> * Can you identify the gene boundary from the viewer? Does it roughly match the partition file?
> * Is there missing data? Which taxa seem to have most missing data?
> * Do you think this missing data can be problematic?
{: .tip}


2) Inferring the first phylogeny
-------------------------------
<div class="hline"></div>
 
You can now start to reconstruct a maximum-likelihood (ML) tree
for the Turtle data set (assuming that you are in the same folder where the alignment is stored):

    iqtree -s turtle.fa -bb 1000 -nt AUTO

Options explained:

* `-s turtle.fa` to specify the input alignment as `turtle.fa`.
* `-bb 1000` to perform the ultrafast bootstrap with 1000 replicates.
* `-nt AUTO` to determine the best number of CPU cores to speed up the analysis.

This simple command will perform three important steps:

1. Model selection (with ModelFinder) to select the best-fit model to the data.
2. Reconstruct the ML tree with the selected model.
3. Assess branch supports with the ultrafast bootstrap.


Once the run is done, IQ-TREE will write several output files including:

* `turtle.fa.iqtree`: the main report file that is self-readable. You
should look at this file to see the computational results. It also contains a textual representation of the final tree. 
* `turtle.fa.treefile`: the ML tree in NEWICK format, which can be visualized in FigTree.
* `turtle.fa.log`: log file of the entire run (also printed on the screen).
* `turtle.fa.ckp.gz`: checkpoint file used to resume an interrupted analysis.
* And a few other files.

> **QUESTIONS:**
>
> * Look at the report file `turtle.fa.iqtree`. 
> * What is the best-fit model? What do you know about this model?
> * Visualise the tree `turtle.fa.treefile` in FigTree.
> * Compare the tree with the published tree ([Chiari et al., 2012]). Are they the same or different?
> * If different, where are the difference(s)?
> * Look at the boostrap supports. Which branch(es) have a low support?
{: .tip}



Further readings:

* ModelFinder: [Kalyaanamoorthy et al. (2017)](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4285).
* IQ-TREE search algorithm: [Nguyen et al. (2015)](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msu300).
* Ultrafast bootstrap: [Minh et al. (2013)](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mst024).



3) Applying partition model
---------------
<div class="hline"></div>


We now perform a partition model analysis, where one allows each partition to have its own model:

	iqtree -s turtle.fa -spp turtle.nex -bb 1000 -nt AUTO

Options explained:

* `-spp turtle.nex` to specify the input partition file. It also initiates an *edge-linked proportional* partition model (i.e. each partition has its own evolutionary rate).

> **QUESTIONS:**
> 
> * Look at the report file `turtle.nex.iqtree`. What are the slowest- and highest-evolving genes?
> * Compare the BIC score of partition model versus un-partition model done above. Which model is better?
> * Visualise the tree `turtle.nex.treefile` in Figtree and compare it with the tree from the un-partitioned model. Are they the same or different? If different, where is the difference? Which tree agrees with [Chiari et al., 2012]?
> * Look at the boostrap supports. Which branch(es) have a low support?
{: .tip}


Further readings:

* Partition models: [Chernomor et al. (2016)](https://doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/syw037).


4) Choosing the best partitioning scheme
-------------------------------------
<div class="hline"></div>

We now perform the PartitionFinder algorithm implemented in IQ-TREE that merges partitions to reduce potential model overfitting:

	iqtree -s turtle.fa -spp turtle.nex -bb 1000 -nt AUTO -m MFP+MERGE -rcluster 10 -pre turtle.merge

Options explained:

* `-m MFP+MERGE` to perform PartitionFinder followed by tree reconstruction.
* `-rcluster 10` to reduce computations by only examining the top 10% partitioning schemes (relaxed clustering algorithm).
* `-pre turtle.merge` to set the prefix for all output files as `turtle.merge.*`. This is to avoid overwriting outputs from the previous analysis.

> **QUESTIONS:**
>
> * Look at the report file `turtle.merge.iqtree`. How many partitions do we have now?
> * What is the BIC score? Is it better or worse than those of the un-partition and partition models done previously?
> * How does the tree look like now? How high/low are the bootstrap supports?
{: .tip}

Further readings:

* PartitionFinder: [Lanfear et al., 2012].
* Relaxed clustering algorithm: [Lanfear et al., 2014].



5) Applying a mixture model - GHOST
---------------
<div class="hline"></div>


We now perform a mixture model analysis, to account for heterotachy both within and between genes:

iqtree -s turtle.fa -m GTR+FO+H4 -bb 1000 -nt AUTO -pre turtle.GHOST4

Options explained:

* `-m GTR+FO+H4` to specify the model of sequence evolution. GTR specifies the General Time reversible model, +FO specifies that base frequencies are to be inferred by maximum likelihood (as opposed to empirical values from the alignment), +H4 means we use the GHOST model with 4 classes, with GTR model parameters linked across the 4 classes.

> **QUESTIONS:**
>
> * Visualise the tree `turtle.GHOST4.treefile` in Figtree and compare it with the trees from the earlier analyses. Are they the same or different? If different, where is the difference? Which tree agrees with [Chiari et al., 2012]?
> * Look at the boostrap supports. Which branch(es) have a low support?
{: .tip}


Further readings:

* GHOST model: [Crotty et al. (2019)](https://doi.org/10.1101/174789).



6) Tree topology tests
----------
<div class="hline"></div>

We now want to know whether the trees inferred for the Turtle data set have significantly different log-likelihoods or not. This can be conducted with Shimodaira-Hasegawa test ([Shimodaira and Hasegawa, 1999]), or expected likelihood weights ([Strimmer and Rambaut, 2002]).

First, concatenate the trees constructed by single and partition models into one file:

For Linux/MacOS:

	cat turtle.fa.treefile turtle.nex.treefile >turtle.trees

For Windows:

	type turtle.fa.treefile turtle.nex.treefile >turtle.trees
	
Now pass this file into IQ-TREE via `-z` option:

	iqtree -s turtle.fa -spp turtle.nex.best_scheme.nex -z turtle.trees -zb 1000 -n 0 -wpl -pre turtle.test

Options explained:

* `-spp turtle.nex.best_scheme.nex` to provide the partition model found previously to avoid model selection again.
* `-z turtle.trees` to provide a set of trees.
* `-zb 1000` to specify 1000 boostrap replicates for tree topology tests.
* `-n 0` to avoid tree search and just perform tree topology tests.
* `-wpl` to print partition-wise log likelihoods for both trees. This will be used in the next section.
* `-pre turtle.test ` to set the prefix for all output files as `turtle.test.*`. 



> **QUESTIONS:**
> 
> * Look at the report file `turtle.test.iqtree`. There is a new section called `USER TREES`.
> * Do the two trees have significantly different log-likelihoods?
{: .tip}


**HINTS**:

 - The KH and SH tests return p-values, thus a tree is rejected if its p-value < 0.05 (marked with a `-` sign).
 - bp-RELL and c-ELW return posterior weights which *are not p-value*. The weights sum up to 1 across the trees tested.



7) Concordance factors
-------------------
<div class="hline"></div>


So far we have assumed that gene trees and species tree are equal. However, it is well known that different genomic loci might lead to different trees. Therefore, we now want to quantify the agreement between gene trees and species tree, so-called concordance factors. 

> This feature is only available in the beta version 1.7-beta6, please download it from <https://github.com/Cibiv/IQ-TREE/releases/tag/v1.7-beta6>. Command `iqtree` in this section needs to point to the installed beta version.

You first need to compute the gene trees, one for each partition separately:

	iqtree -s turtle.fa -S turtle.nex -pre turtle.loci -nt 2
	
Options explained:

* `-S turtle.nex` to specify the partition file and tell IQ-TREE to infer separate trees for every partition.

All output files are similar to a partition analysis, except that the tree `turtle.loci.treefile` now contains a set of gene trees.

The gene concordance factor (gCF) and site concordance factor (sCF) for a reference tree are defined as follows. For every branch of a reference tree, gCF is defined as the percentage of “decisive” gene trees containing that branch and sCF is the percentage of decisive alignment sites supporting that branch.

You can now compute gCF and sCF for the tree inferred under partition model

	iqtree -t turtle.nex.treefile --gcf turtle.loci.treefile -s turtle.fa --scf 100
	
Options explained:

* `-t turtle.nex.treefile` to specify a species tree.
* `--gcf turtle.loci.treefile` to specify a gene-trees file.
* `--scf 100` to draw 100 random quartets when computing sCF.


Once finished this run will write several files:

* `turtle.nex.treefile.cf.tree`: tree file where branches are annotated with bootstrap/gCF/sCF values.
* `turtle.nex.treefile.cf.stat`: a table file with various statistics for every branch of the tree.

Similarly, you can compute gCF and sCF for the tree under unpartitioned model:

	iqtree -t turtle.fa.treefile --gcf turtle.loci.treefile -s turtle.fa --scf 100


> **QUESTIONS:**
> 
> * Visualise `turtle.nex.treefile.cf.tree`in FigTree. 
> * How do gCF and sCF values look compared with bootstrap supports?
> * Visualise `turtle.fa.treefile.cf.tree`. How do these values look like now on the contradicting branch?
{: .tip}


> **FINAL QUESTION:** In your opinion, which tree do you think is the true tree, given all analyses done in this Tutorial?



8) Identifying most influential genes (optional)
-----------------------------
<div class="hline"></div>


Now we want to investigate the cause for such topological difference between trees inferred by single and partition model. One way is to identify genes contributing most phylogenetic signal towards one tree but not the other. 

How can one do this? Well, we can look at the gene-wise log-likelihood differences between the two trees, called T1 and T2. Those genes having the largest lnL(T1)-lnL(T2) will be in favor of T1. Whereas genes showing the largest lnL(T2)-lnL(T1) are favoring T2.

With the `-wpl` option done above, IQ-TREE will write partition-wise log-likelihoods into `turtle.test.partlh` file.

> **QUESTIONS:**
>
> * Import this file into MS Excel. Compute the partition wise log-likelihood differences between two trees. 
> * What are the two genes that most favor the tree inferred by single model?
> * Have a look at the paper by ([Brown and Thomson, 2016]). Compare the two genes you found with those from this paper. What is special about these two genes?
{: .tip}


[Adachi and Hasegawa, 1996]: http://www.is.titech.ac.jp/~shimo/class/doc/csm96.pdf
[Anisimova et al., 2011]: https://doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/syr041
[Brinkmann et al., 2005]: https://doi.org/10.1080/10635150500234609
[Brown and Thomson, 2016]: https://doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/syw101
[Chiari et al., 2012]: https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7007-10-65
[Crotty et al., 2019]: https://doi.org/10.1101/174789
[Gadagkar et al., 2005]: https://doi.org/10.1002/jez.b.21026
[Guindon et al., 2010]: https://doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/syq010
[Hoang et al., 2018]: https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msx281
[Kishino et al., 1990]: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02109483
[Kishino and Hasegawa, 1989]: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02100115
[Lanfear et al., 2012]: https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mss020
[Lanfear et al., 2014]: https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2148-14-82
[Le et al., 2008a]: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btn445
[Lewis, 2001]: https://doi.org/10.1080/106351501753462876
[Lopez et al., 2002]: http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/19/1/1.full
[Mayrose et al., 2004]: https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msh194
[Minh et al., 2013]: https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mst024
[Nei et al., 2001]: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.051611498
[Shimodaira and Hasegawa, 1999]: https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a026201
[Shimodaira, 2002]: https://doi.org/10.1080/10635150290069913
[Strimmer and Rambaut, 2002]: https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2001.1862
[Wang et al., 2018]: https://doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/syx068
[Yang, 1994]: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00160154
[Yang, 1995]: http://www.genetics.org/content/139/2/993.abstract

