---
layout: post
title: "MPBoot: fast phylogenetic maximum parsimony tree inference and bootstrap approximation"
author: Admin
version: 1.1.0
tags:
- publication
permalink: mpboot/
---

## Introduction

MPBoot is an open-source and efficient program to reconstruct maximum parsimony phylogenetic trees for large DNA and protein sequence alignments. Importantly, MPBoot provides a fast approximation for maximum parsimony bootstrap, inspired by a similar methodology for maximum likelihood [(Minh et al., 2013)](https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mst024). If you use MPBoot in a paper please cite:

__D.T. Hoang, L.S. Vinh, T. Flouri, A. Stamatakis, A. von Haeseler, and B.Q. Minh__ (2018) MPBoot: fast phylogenetic maximum parsimony tree inference and bootstrap approximation. _BMC Evol. Biol._, 18, 11. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12862-018-1131-3>

For feedback or bug reports please post a question to the IQ-TREE forum:

<https://groups.google.com/d/forum/iqtree>

## Download

Precomplied executables are provided for computers with SSE4 or AVX support:

* [Linux Ubuntu 64-bit SSE4](mpboot-sse-{{page.version}}-Linux.tar.gz)
* [Linux Ubuntu 64-bit AVX](mpboot-avx-{{page.version}}-Linux.tar.gz)
* [Mac OSX 64-bit SSE4](mpboot-sse-{{page.version}}-MacOSX.zip)
* [Mac OSX 64-bit-AVX](mpboot-avx-{{page.version}}-MacOSX.zip)

1. Extract the files (e.g., with `tar xvzf mpboot-avx-{{page.version}}-Linux.tar.gz` under Unix). This should create a directory `mpboot-avx-{{page.version}}-Linux`.
2. You will find the executable `mpboot` or `mpboot-avx` in `bin` folder inside the extracted folder. You can rename it to `mpboot` and copy to your system search path such that you can invoke it by entering `mpboot` from the terminal.

## Compilation from source code

In case you cannot find executables for your platforms or want to compile the source code:

1. Download the source code [mpboot-{{page.version}}-Source.zip](mpboot-{{page.version}}-Source.zip) or [mpboot-{{page.version}}-Source.tar.gz](mpboot-{{page.version}}-Source.tar.gz). You can also get the latest code from <https://github.com/diepthihoang/mpboot>.
2. Uncompress it.
3. Create folder `build` in the uncompressed source code folder: `mkdir build`.
4. Change directory to build: `cd build`.
5. Run cmake:

        cmake .. -DIQTREE_FLAGS=sse4 -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++

6. Replace `sse4` by `avx` in above command if you decide to run MPBoot on AVX-supported machines.
7. Run `make`.
8. You will find the executable named `mpboot` (or `mpboot-avx`) once the make command is done.


## Minimal command-line examples

(replace `mpboot` with actual path to executable)

1. Reconstruct maximum parsimony tree from a sequence alignment (`example.phy`):

        mpboot -s example.phy

2. Reconstruct MP tree and assess branch supports with the MPBoot method (1000 replicates):

        mpboot -s example.phy -bb 1000

3. Display all usage options:

        mpboot -h

## Input/output files

Input alignment file `example.phy` is in PHYLIP format. MPBoot also supports FASTA or NEXUS format.

Output files:

* MPBoot report file: `example.phy.mpboot`
* Maximum-parsimony tree file: `example.phy.treefile`
* Split support values file: `example.phy.splits.nex`
* Consensus tree file: `example.phy.contree`
* Screen log file: `example.phy.log`

## Available options

| Option   | Usage and meaning                   |
|-----------|------------------------|
| -mulhits | Store multiple equally parsimonious trees per bootstrap replicate |
| -ratchet_iter <number> | Number of non-ratchet iterations before each ratchet iteration (default: 1) |
| -ratchet_wgt <number> | Weight to add to each site selected for perturbation during ratchet (default: 1) |
| -ratchet_percent <number> | Percentage of informative sites selected for perturbation during ratchet (default: 50) |
| -ratchet_off | Turn of ratchet, i.e. Only use tree perturbation |
| -spr_rad <number> | Maximum radius of SPR (default: 6) |
| -cand_cutoff <#s> | Use top #s percentile as cutoff for selecting bootstrap candidates (default: 10) |
| -opt_btree_off | Turn off refinement step on the final bootstrap tree set |
| -nni_pars | Hill-climb by NNI instead of SPR |
| -cost <file> | Read <file> for the square matrix of transition cost between character states. First line contains one integer implying the number of character states (denoted by N). Each of the following N lines comprises N integers implying the cost for transitioning between character states. For DNA, set N=4. For protein, set N=20. |

## Credits and Acknowledgement

The code was originally derived from the IQ-TREE software and the [Phylogenetic likelihood library](http://libpll.org).

D.T. Hoang and L.S. Vinh were financially supported by Vietnam National Foundation for Science and Technology Development (Grant #102.01-2013.04). B.Q. Minh and A. von Haeseler were supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF I-2805-B29), T. Flouri and A. Stamatakis by the German Science Foundation (DFG STA860-6/1), and the Klaus Tschira Foundation.

